<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XL</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-40" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XL</h2>
			<section id="chapter-40-1" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬Ýand <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝRippleton Holabird had invited only Joyce and Martin to dinner. Holabird was his most charming self. He admired Joyce‚Äôs pearls, and when the squabs had been served he turned on Martin with friendly intensity:</p>
				<p>‚ÄúNow will Joyce and you listen to me most particularly? Things are happening, Martin, and I want you‚ÅÝ‚Äîno, Science wants you!‚ÅÝ‚Äîto take your proper part in them. I needn‚Äôt, by the way, hint that this is absolutely confidential. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝTubbs and his League of Cultural Agencies are beginning to accomplish marvels, and Colonel Minnigen has been extraordinarily liberal.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúThey‚Äôve gone at the League with exactly the sort of thoroughness and taking-it-slow that you and dear old Gottlieb have always insisted on. For four years now they‚Äôve stuck to making plans. I happen to know that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝTubbs and the council of the League have had the most wonderful conferences with college-presidents and editors and clubwomen and labor-leaders (the sound, sensible ones, of course) and efficiency-experts and the more advanced advertising-men and ministers, and all the other leaders of public thought.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúThey‚Äôve worked out elaborate charts classifying all intellectual occupations and interests, with the methods and materials and tools, and especially the goals‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe aims, the ideals, the moral purposes‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat are suited to each of them. Really tremendous! Why, a musician or an engineer, for example, could look at his chart and tell accurately whether he was progressing fast enough, at his age, and if not, just what his trouble was, and the remedy. With this basis, the League is ready to go to work and encourage all brain-workers to affiliate.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúMcGurk Institute simply must get in on this coordination, which I regard as one of the greatest advances in thinking that has ever been made. We are at last going to make all the erstwhile chaotic spiritual activities of America really conform to the American ideal; we‚Äôre going to make them as practical and supreme as the manufacture of cash-registers! I have certain reasons for supposing I can bring Ross McGurk and Minnigen together, now that the McGurk and Minnigen lumber interests have stopped warring, and if so I shall probably quit the Institute and help Tubbs guide the League of Cultural Agencies. Then we‚Äôll need a new Director of McGurk who will work with us and help bring Science out of the monastery to serve Mankind.‚Äù</p>
				<p>By this time Martin understood everything about the League except what the League was trying to do.</p>
				<p>Holabird went on:</p>
				<p>‚ÄúNow I know, Martin, that you‚Äôve always rather sneered at Practicalness, but I have faith in you! I believe you‚Äôve been too much under the influence of Wickett, and now that he‚Äôs gone and you‚Äôve seen more of life and of Joyce‚Äôs set and mine, I believe I can coax you to take (oh! without in any way neglecting the severities of your lab work!) a broader view.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúI am authorized to appoint an Assistant Director, and I think I‚Äôm safe in saying he would succeed me as full Director. Sholtheis wants the place, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝSmith and Yeo would leap at it, but I haven‚Äôt yet found any of them that are quite Our Own Sort, and I offer it to you! I daresay in a year or two, you will be Director of McGurk Institute!‚Äù</p>
				<p>Holabird was uplifted, as one giving royal favor. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝHolabird was intense, as one present on an historical occasion and Joyce was ecstatic over the honor to her Man.</p>
				<p>Martin stammered, ‚ÄúW-why, I‚Äôll have to think it over. Sort of unexpected‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
				<p>The rest of the evening Holabird so brimmingly enjoyed himself picturing an era in which Tubbs and Martin and he would rule, coordinate, standardize, and make useful the whole world of intelligence, from trousers-designing to poetry, that he did not resent Martin‚Äôs silence. At parting he chanted, ‚ÄúTalk it over with Joyce, and let me have your decision tomorrow. By the way, I think we‚Äôll get rid of Pearl Robbins; she‚Äôs been useful but now she considers herself indispensable. But that‚Äôs a detail‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Oh, I do have faith in you, Martin, dear old boy! You‚Äôve grown and calmed down, and you‚Äôve widened your interests so much, this past year!‚Äù</p>
				<p>In their car, in that moving curtained room under the crystal dome-light, Joyce beamed at him.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúIsn‚Äôt it too wonderful, Mart! And I do feel Rippleton can bring it off. Think of your being Director, head of that whole great Institute, when just a few years ago you were only a cub there! But haven‚Äôt I perhaps helped, just a little?‚Äù</p>
				<p>Suddenly Martin hated the blue-and-gold velvet of the car, the cunningly hid gold box of cigarettes, all this soft and smothering prison. He wanted to be out beside the unseen chauffeur‚ÅÝ‚ÄîHis Own Sort!‚ÅÝ‚Äîfacing the winter. He tried to look as though he were meditating, in an awed, appreciative manner, but he was merely being cowardly, reluctant to begin the slaughter. Slowly:</p>
				<p>‚ÄúWould you really like to see me Director?‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúOf course! All that‚ÅÝ‚ÄîOh, you know; I don‚Äôt just mean the prominence and respect, but the power to accomplish good.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúWould you like to see me dictating letters, giving out interviews, buying linoleum, having lunch with distinguished fools, advising men about whose work I don‚Äôt know a blame thing?‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúOh, don‚Äôt be so superior! Someone has to do these things. And that‚Äôd be only a small part of it. Think of the opportunity of encouraging some youngster who wanted a chance to do splendid science!‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúAnd give up my own chance?‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúWhy need you? You‚Äôd be head of your own department just the same. And even if you did give up‚ÅÝ‚ÄîYou are so stubborn! It‚Äôs lack of imagination. You think that because you‚Äôve started in on one tiny branch of mental activity, there‚Äôs nothing else in the world. It‚Äôs just as when I persuaded you that if you got out of your stinking laboratory once a week or so, and actually bent your powerful intellect to a game of golf, the world of science wouldn‚Äôt immediately stop! No imagination! You‚Äôre precisely like these businessmen you‚Äôre always cursing because they can‚Äôt see anything in life beyond their soap-factories or their banks!‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúAnd you really would have me give up my work‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
				<p>He saw that with all her eager complaisances she had never understood what he was up to, had not comprehended one word about the murderous effect of the directorship on Gottlieb.</p>
				<p>He was silent again, and before they reached home she said only, ‚ÄúYou know I‚Äôm the last person to speak of money, but really, it‚Äôs you who have so often brought up the matter of hating to be dependent on me, and you know as Director you would make so much more that‚ÅÝ‚ÄîForgive me!‚Äù</p>
				<p>She fled before him into her palace, into the automatic elevator.</p>
				<p>He plodded up the stairs, grumbling, ‚ÄúYes, it is the first chance I‚Äôve had to really contribute to the expenses here. Sure! Willing to take her money, but not to do anything in return, and then call it ‚Äòdevotion to science!‚Äô Well, I‚Äôve got to decide right now‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
				<p>He did not go through the turmoil of deciding; he leaped to decision without it. He marched into Joyce‚Äôs room, irritated by its snobbishness of discreet color. He was checked by the miserable way in which she sat brooding on the edge of her day couch, but he flung:</p>
				<p>‚ÄúI‚Äôm not going to do it, even if I have to leave the Institute‚ÅÝ‚Äîand Holabird will just about make me quit. I will not get buried in this pompous fakery of giving orders and‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúMart! Listen! Don‚Äôt you want your son to be proud of you?‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúUm. Well‚ÅÝ‚Äî<em>no</em>, not if he‚Äôs to be proud of me for being a stuffed shirt, a sideshow barker‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúPlease don‚Äôt be vulgar.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúWhy not? Matter of fact, I haven‚Äôt been vulgar enough lately. What I ought to do is to go to Birdies‚Äô Rest right now, and work with Terry.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúI wish I had some way of showing you‚ÅÝ‚ÄîOh, for a ‚Äòscientist‚Äô you do have the most incredible blind-spots! I wish I could make you see just how weak and futile that is. The wilds! The simple life! The old argument. It‚Äôs just the absurd, cowardly sort of thing these tired highbrows do that sneak off to some Esoteric Colony and think they‚Äôre getting strength to conquer life, when they‚Äôre merely running away from it.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúNo. Terry has his place in the country only because he can live cheaper there. If we‚ÅÝ‚Äîif he could afford it, he‚Äôd probably be right here, in town, with gar√ßons and everything, like McGurk, but with no Director Holabird, by God‚ÅÝ‚Äîand no Director Arrowsmith!‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúMerely a cursing, ill-bred, intensely selfish Director Terry Wickett!‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúNow, by God, let me tell you‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúMartin, do you need to emphasize your arguments by a ‚Äòby God‚Äô in every sentence, or have you a few other expressions in your highly scientific vocabulary?‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúWell, I have enough vocabulary to express the idea that I‚Äôm thinking of joining Terry.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúLook here, Mart. You feel so virtuous about wanting to go off and wear a flannel shirt and be peculiar and very, very pure. Suppose everybody argued that way. Suppose every father deserted his children whenever his nice little soul ached? Just what would become of the world? Suppose I were poor, and you left me, and I had to support John by taking in washing‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôd probably be fine for you but fierce on the washing! No! I beg your pardon. That was an obvious answer. But‚ÅÝ‚ÄîI imagine it‚Äôs just that argument that‚Äôs kept almost everybody, all these centuries, from being anything but a machine for digestion and propagation and obedience. The answer is that very few ever do, under any condition, willingly leave a soft bed for a shanty bunk in order to be pure, as you very properly call it, and those of us that are pioneers‚ÅÝ‚ÄîOh, this debate could go on forever! We could prove that I‚Äôm a hero or a fool or a deserter or anything you like, but the fact is I‚Äôve suddenly seen I must go! I want my freedom to work, and I herewith quit whining about it and grab it. You‚Äôve been generous to me. I‚Äôm grateful. But you‚Äôve never been mine. Goodbye.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúDarling, darling‚ÅÝ‚ÄîWe‚Äôll talk it over again in the morning, when you aren‚Äôt so excited‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ And an hour ago I was so proud of you!‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúAll right. Good night.‚Äù</p>
				<p>But before morning, taking two suitcases and a bag of his roughest clothes, leaving for her a tender note which was the hardest thing he had ever written, kissing his son and muttering, ‚ÄúCome to me when you grow up, old man,‚Äù he went to a cheap side-street hotel. As he stretched on the rickety iron bed, he grieved for their love. Before noon he had gone to the Institute, resigned, taken certain of his own apparatus and notes and books and materials, refused to answer a telephone call from Joyce, and caught a train for Vermont.</p>
				<p>Cramped on the red-plush seat of the day-coach (he who of late had ridden in silken private cars), he grinned with the joy of no longer having to toil at dinner-parties.</p>
				<p>He drove up to Birdies‚Äô Rest in a bobsled. Terry was chopping wood, in a mess of chip-littered snow.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúHello, Terry. Come for keeps.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúFine, Slim. Say, there‚Äôs a lot of dishes in the shack need washing.‚Äù</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-40-2" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">II</h3>
				<p>He had become soft. To dress in the cold shanty and to wash in icy water was agony; to tramp for three hours through fluffy snow exhausted him. But the rapture of being allowed to work twenty-four hours a day without leaving an experiment at its juiciest moment to creep home for dinner, of plunging with Terry into arguments as cryptic as theology and furious as the indignation of a drunken man, carried him along, and he felt himself growing sinewy. Often he meditated on yielding to Joyce so far as to allow her to build a better laboratory for them, and more civilized quarters.</p>
				<p>With only one servant, though, or two at the very most, and just a simple decent bathroom‚ÅÝ‚Äî</p>
				<p>She had written, ‚ÄúYou have been thoroughly beastly, and any attempt at reconciliation, if that is possible now, which I rather doubt, must come from you.‚Äù</p>
				<p>He answered, describing the ringing winter woods and not mentioning the platform word Reconciliation.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-40-3" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
				<p>They wanted to study further the exact mechanism of the action of their quinine derivatives. This was difficult with the mice which Terry had contrived to use instead of monkeys, because of their size. Martin had brought with him strains of <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Bacillus lepisepticus</i>, which causes a pleuropneumonia in rabbits, and their first labor was to discover whether their original compound was effective against this bacillus as well as against pneumococcus. Profanely they found that it was not; profanely and patiently they trudged into an infinitely complicated search for a compound that should be.</p>
				<p>They earned their living by preparing sera which rather grudgingly they sold to physicians of whose honesty they were certain, abruptly refusing the popular drug-vendors. They thus received surprisingly large sums, and among all clever people it was believed that they were too coyly shrewd to be sincere.</p>
				<p>Martin worried as much over what he considered his treachery to Clif Clawson as over his desertion of Joyce and John, but this worrying he did only when he could not sleep. Regularly, at three in the morning, he brought both Joyce and honest Clif to Birdies‚Äô Rest; and regularly, at six, when he was frying bacon, he forgot them.</p>
				<p>Terry the barbarian, once he was free of the tittering and success-pawing of Holabird, was an easy campmate. Upper berth or lower was the same to him, and till Martin was hardened to cold and fatigue, Terry did more than his share of wood-cutting and supply-toting, and with great melody and skill he washed their clothes.</p>
				<p>He had the genius to see that they two alone, shut up together season on season, would quarrel. He planned with Martin that the laboratory scheme should be extended to include eight (but never more!) maverick and undomestic researchers like themselves, who should contribute to the expenses of the camp by manufacturing sera, but otherwise do their own independent work‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhether it should be the structure of the atom, or a disproof of the results of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Drs.</abbr>¬ÝWickett and Arrowsmith. Two rebels, a chemist now caught in a drug-firm and a university professor, were coming next autumn.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs kind of a mis‚Äôable return to monasteries,‚Äù grumbled Terry, ‚Äúexcept that we‚Äôre not trying to solve anything for anybody but our own fool selves. Mind you! When this place becomes a shrine, and a lot of cranks begin to creep in here, then you and I got to beat it, Slim. We‚Äôll move farther back in the woods, or if we feel too old for that, we‚Äôll take another shot at professorships or Dawson Hunziker or even the <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝHolabird.‚Äù</p>
				<p>For the first time Martin‚Äôs work began definitely to draw ahead of Terry‚Äôs.</p>
				<p>His mathematics and physical chemistry were now as sound as Terry‚Äôs, his indifference to publicity and to flowery hangings as great, his industry as fanatical, his ingenuity in devising new apparatus at least comparable, and his imagination far more swift. He had less ease but more passion. He hurled out hypotheses like sparks. He began, incredulously, to comprehend his freedom. He would yet determine the essential nature of phage; and as he became stronger and surer‚ÅÝ‚Äîand no doubt less human‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe saw ahead of him innumerous inquiries into chemotherapy and immunity; enough adventures to keep him busy for decades.</p>
				<p>It seemed to him that this was the first spring he had ever seen and tasted. He learned to dive into the lake, though the first plunge was an agony of fiery cold. They fished before breakfast, they supped at a table under the oaks, they tramped twenty miles on end, they had bluejays and squirrels for interested neighbors; and when they had worked all night, they came out to find serene dawn lifting across the sleeping lake.</p>
				<p>Martin felt sun-soaked and deep of chest, and always he hummed.</p>
				<p>And one day he peeped out, beneath his new horn-rimmed almost-middle-aged glasses, to see a gigantic motor crawling up their woods road. From the car, jolly and competent in tweeds, stepped Joyce.</p>
				<p>He wanted to flee through the back door of the laboratory shanty. Reluctantly he edged out to meet her.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúIt‚Äôs a sweet place, really!‚Äù she said, and amiably kissed him. ‚ÄúLet‚Äôs walk down by the lake.‚Äù</p>
				<p>In a stilly place of ripples and birch boughs, he was moved to grip her shoulders.</p>
				<p>She cried, ‚ÄúDarling, I <em>have</em> missed you! You‚Äôre wrong about lots of things, but you‚Äôre right about this‚ÅÝ‚Äîyou must work and not be disturbed by a lot of silly people. Do you like my tweeds? Don‚Äôt they look wildernessy? You see, I‚Äôve come to stay! I‚Äôll build a house near here; perhaps right across the lake. Yes. That will make a sweet place, over there on that sort of little plateau, if I can get the land‚ÅÝ‚Äîprobably some horrid tightfisted old farmer owns it. Can‚Äôt you just <em>see</em> it: a wide low house, with enormous verandas and red awnings‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúAnd visitors coming?‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúI suppose so. Sometimes. Why?‚Äù</p>
				<p>Desperately, ‚ÄúJoyce, I do love you. I want awfully, just now, to kiss you properly. But I will not have you bringing a lot of people‚ÅÝ‚Äîand there‚Äôd probably be a rotten noisy motor launch. Make our lab a joke. Roadhouse. New sensation. Why, Terry would go crazy! You <em>are</em> lovely! But you want a playmate, and I want to work. I‚Äôm afraid you can‚Äôt stay. No.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúAnd our son is to be left without your care?‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúHe‚ÅÝ‚ÄîWould he have my care if I died?‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ He is a nice kid, too! I hope he won‚Äôt be a Rich Man!‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶ Perhaps ten years from now he‚Äôll come to me here.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúAnd live like <em>this</em>?‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúSure‚ÅÝ‚Äîunless I‚Äôm broke. Then he won‚Äôt live so well. We have meat practically every day now!‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúI see. And suppose your Terry Wickett should marry some waitress or some incredibly stupid rustic? From what you‚Äôve told me, he rather fancies that sort of girl!‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúWell, either he and I would beat her, together, or it would be the one thing that could break me.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúMartin, aren‚Äôt you perhaps a little insane?‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúOh, absolutely! And how I enjoy it! Though you‚ÅÝ‚ÄîYou look here now, Joy! We‚Äôre insane but we‚Äôre not cranks! Yesterday an ‚Äòesoteric healer‚Äô came here because he thought this was a free colony, and Terry walked him twenty miles, and then I think he threw him in the lake. No. Gosh. Let me think.‚Äù He scratched his chin. ‚ÄúI don‚Äôt believe we‚Äôre insane. We‚Äôre farmers.‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúMartin, it‚Äôs too infinitely diverting to find you becoming a fanatic, and all the while trying to wriggle out of being a fanatic. You‚Äôve left common sense. I <em>am</em> common sense. I believe in bathing! Goodbye!‚Äù</p>
				<p>‚ÄúNow you look here. By golly‚ÅÝ‚Äî‚Äù</p>
				<p>She was gone, reasonable and triumphant.</p>
				<p>As the chauffeur maneuvered among the stumps of the clearing, for a moment Joyce looked out from her car, and they stared at each other, through tears. They had never been so frank, so pitiful, as in this one unarmored look which recalled every jest, every tenderness, every twilight they had known together. But the car rolled on unhalted, and he remembered that he had been doing an experiment‚ÅÝ‚Äî</p>
			</section>
			<section id="chapter-40-4" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
				<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>On a certain evening of May, Congressman Almus Pickerbaugh was dining with the President of the United States.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúWhen the campaign is over, Doctor,‚Äù said the President, ‚ÄúI hope we shall see you a cabinet-member‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe first Secretary of Health and Eugenics in the country!‚Äù</p>
				<p>That evening, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝRippleton Holabird was addressing a meeting of celebrated thinkers, assembled by the League of Cultural Agencies. Among the Men of Measured Merriment on the platform were <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝAaron Sholtheis, the new Director of McGurk Institute, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝAngus Duer, head of the Duer Clinic and professor of surgery in Fort Dearborn Medical College.</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr>¬ÝHolabird‚Äôs epochal address was being broadcast by radio to a million ardently listening lovers of science.</p>
				<p>That evening, Bert Tozer of Wheatsylvania, North Dakota, was attending midweek prayer-meeting. His new Buick sedan awaited him outside, and with modest satisfaction he heard the minister gloat:</p>
				<p>‚ÄúThe righteous, even the Children of Light, they shall be rewarded with a great reward and their feet shall walk in gladness, saith the Lord of Hosts; but the mockers, the Sons of Belial, they shall be slain betimes and cast down into darkness and failure, and in the busy marts shall they be forgot.‚Äù</p>
				<p>That evening, Max Gottlieb sat unmoving and alone, in a dark small room above the banging city street. Only his eyes were alive.</p>
				<p>That evening, the hot breeze languished along the palm-waving ridge where the ashes of Gustaf Sondelius were lost among cinders, and a depression in a garden marked the grave of Leora.</p>
				<p>That evening, after an unusually gay dinner with Latham Ireland, Joyce admitted, ‚ÄúYes, if I do divorce him, I may marry you. I know! He‚Äôs never going to see how egotistical it is to think he‚Äôs the only man living who‚Äôs always right!‚Äù</p>
				<p>That evening, Martin Arrowsmith and Terry Wickett lolled in a clumsy boat, an extraordinarily uncomfortable boat, far out on the water.</p>
				<p>‚ÄúI feel as if I were really beginning to work now,‚Äù said Martin. ‚ÄúThis new quinine stuff may prove pretty good. We‚Äôll plug along on it for two or three years, and maybe we‚Äôll get something permanent‚ÅÝ‚Äîand probably we‚Äôll fail!‚Äù</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
